# Standard Targets



The following targets work both at the top level, and in any subdirectory of the tree.  When used in a subdirectory, they apply only to the components of the system in that directory.


<table><tr><th>`help`</th>
<td>
Invoking `make help` in any directory of the build tree will elicit
a message describing the targets available in that directory.
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th>`all`</th>
<td>
(default target, can be omitted).  Builds all the targets for this
directory.  At the top level, builds everything that needs to
be built for a GHC installation, including the stage 2 GHC, all
libraries and documentation.  After `make`, `make install` will not
need to do any further rebuilding.
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th>`clean`</th>
<td>
Delete all files from the current directory that are normally
created by `make`.  Don't delete the files that record the
configuration.
</td></tr></table>



To see how these targets are defined: [Building/Architecture/Idiom/StandardTargets](building/architecture/idiom/standard-targets).


## Top level targets



The following targets are accepted only by the top-level `Makefile`:


<table><tr><th>`install` and `install-strip`</th>
<td>(Non-Windows only)
installs the things built by `all`.  Where does it install them?  In
the places you specified when running `configure`, principally set
by the `--prefix` flag, or in `DESTDIR`; see [Building/Installing](building/installing).
The `install-strip` variant strips executable files while installing them.
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th>`distclean`</th>
<td>
The same as `clean`, but also removes files created by `configure`.
`distclean` preserves files that would normally go in a source
distrubtion.  Note that after `make distclean` you will have to run
`./configure` before building again.
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th>`maintainer-clean`</th>
<td>
The same as `distclean`, but also removes files generated by `python3 boot`.
The result of `make maintainer-clean` should be a completely clean
source tree, containing only revision-controlled files (besides files
you created yourself, like for example mk/build.mk).
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th>`test`</th>
<td>
Runs the testsuite with some sensible default settings.
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th>`fasttest`</th>
<td>
Runs the testsuite in fast mode.
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th>`slowtest` (GHC \<= 7.10: `fulltest`)</th>
<td>
Runs the full testsuite.
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th>`binary-dist`</th>
<td>
Builds a binary distribution.  A binary distribution is a copy of
the build tree with the source files removed, such that it can be
installed on a different system simply by issuing \`./configure; make
install\`.
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th>`sdist`</th>
<td>
Builds a source distribution.  A source distribution is a source
tree for GHC, complete with some extra files included for
convenience so that the user doesn't need to install `autoconf`,
`Happy`, or `Alex` in order to build it.
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th>`TAGS`, `tags`</th>
<td>
Makes files `TAGS` (for emacs) and `tags` (for vim) in the top-level directory. To make Vim happy, use this command to sort them: `LC_COLLATE=C sort tags`.
</td></tr></table>


## Documentation Targets



The following targets build the users guide:


<table><tr><th>`html`</th>
<td>
Builds the users guide in HTML format.
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th>`pdf`</th>
<td>
Builds the users guide in PDF format.
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th>`ps`</th>
<td>
Builds the users guide in PS format.
</td></tr></table>


