# Idiom: platform names



There are three platforms of interest when building GHC:


- `$(BUILDPLATFORM)`: The *build* platform.

  The platform on which we are doing this build.

- `$(HOSTPLATFORM)`: The *host* platform.

  The platform on which these binaries will run.

- `$(TARGETPLATFORM)`: The *target* platform.

  The platform for which this compiler will generate code.


      
These platforms are set when running the
`configure` script, using the
`--build`, `--host`, and
`--target` options.  The `mk/project.mk`
file, which is generated by `configure` from [mk/project.mk.in](/trac/ghc/browser/mk/project.mk.in)[](/trac/ghc/export/HEAD/ghc/mk/project.mk.in), defines several symbols related to the platform settings.



We don't currently support build and host being different, because
the build process creates binaries that are both run during the build,
and also installed.



If host and target are different, then we are building a cross-compiler. See [CrossCompilation](cross-compilation) for the work-in-progress toolset.



There is another option, which is similar in essence, namely creating a portable compiler. For GHC, this means a compiler which will generate intermediate `.hc` files to port to the target architecture for bootstrapping.  The libraries and stage 2 compiler will be built as `.hc` files for the target system (see [Porting GHC](building/porting) for details).



More details on when to use BUILD, HOST or TARGET can be found in
the comments in [mk/project.mk.in](/trac/ghc/browser/mk/project.mk.in)[](/trac/ghc/export/HEAD/ghc/mk/project.mk.in).


